---
layout: post
category: writing
title: "Three Cheers for Two Words: Good Enough"
subtitle: "An incomplete exploration."
date: '2023-03-28'
draft: true
---

I'm a huge proponent of good enough. At age six when told to clean my room: shove every last thing under the bed. Good enough. At age sixteen when taking a geometry test: B minus. Good enough. Last month when cutting a baseboard to install in the kitchen: "I can fill in that unsightly gap with some caulk." Good enough. My life is so steeped in the philosophy of _good enough_, I'm considering commissioning a legs-only replica of Michelangelo's David with a placard that reads "This'll Do". Granted, this isn't to say excellence has no place in this world or in my life. I wouldn't want my heart surgeon subscribing to my "good enough" lifestyle, nor would I want to watch the Olympics if all the runners were doubled over after 60 meters because they were out of shape. They key is knowing which is which and determining when it's safe to say those magic words.

Some might view the phrase Good Enough as the calling card of underachievers. And to those people I say, "well...no shit." But despite my best efforts to slack off my whole life, I somehow managed to keep making progress. How that happened is probably debatable, but it all starts with objectives. What's the ultimate vision for this activity? What does its final form look like? This fundamental question bifurcates what I do into one of two categories: the lifelong pursuit or the ad-hoc fix. It begins as a simple choice. Here I stand, lording over some _thing_ that has to be _done_. The choice isn't whether or not to do the thing. If it didn't absolutely have to be done, I wouldn't be standing here at all. I'm not sure where I'd be, but at the very least you can be sure I'd be sitting, not standing. Anyway, the choice isn't whether or not to do the thing. The choice is something like this: "do I wish to be great at doing this thing and other things like it in the future, or do I need to simply put a tourniquate on it so it doesn't bleed to death right here on my white carpet?" Most things in my life fall into the latter category. These ad-hoc tasks are more binary and objective than lifelong pursuits. The tire either has enough air or it doesn't.

It doesn't escape me that the spectrum for interpretation of what constitutes good enough is as varied as humankind itself. The superstar's bare minimum is sometimes the average Joe's maximum attack, so the entire premise must be scoped to the individual. It _is_ useful, however, to glean clues of what's possible by looking at what others have already achieved, and I'll explore this a bit later.

I played sports when I was in high school. When the final class bell rang for the day, the more dedicated athletes went to the locker room, got changed, and hit the gym. I, on the other hand, went home, grabbed some pretzels out of the pantry, poured a tall glass of Diet Coke, and sat down to watch TV. Our objectives were the same. We both wanted to perform well and have fun. But I was satisfied with my existing level of play and didn't see the gym as necessary to maintain that standard. However, context is critical. Our hockey team was decent, but it was safe to assume we wouldn't contend for the championship. Plus, the program was brand new, so there was no history of expectations to live up to. But what if our team wasn't new? What if we _were_ contenders? What if we had won the last 7 championships and the culture of excellence was already build up? What if all the coaches ever talked about was giving maximum effort? What if I _had_ to go to the gym after school? My dreams of Diet Coke and pretzels would be dashed, that's what. Which raises another interesting question. Would I even try out for that team in the first place? Looking at my lifelong pursuits reveals the answer. My lifelong plans included going to art school and the pursuit of finding a career doing something creative. They did not include the pursuit of becoming a professional athlete or even playing college sports. For my actual hockey team, the one with low expectations, my skills were good enough to make an impact and not be a burden on my teammates. For the 7-time champs, though? I'd have to make it my life's mission to improve my mind, body, and skill level to achieve the same outcome. In that scenario, my goals would be incongruous to the effort required to play hockey, leading me to find something else to do for fun.

It's easy to justify these decisions with hindsight because the path between then and now is known. If years later I uncovered a deep passion for hockey and pursued a career in the sport, I might regret not pushing myself to see how far I could have taken my playing career. This shines a spotlight on the importance of establishing a theme to work towards. My level of effort is directly tied to the likelihood it will move the needle towards my theme. I hesitate to use the word goal, because a goal has an end. If my goal is to have a career in the Arts, what happens if I achieve it? The pursuit is over and I have to think of a new goal or risk getting lost. When stated as a goal, it's also unclear what steps I need to take to even manifest it. If instead I pursue a theme of "creating outstanding work, regardless of the medium", a system emerges whose outcome is _at least_ a career in the Arts. In that system, the steps are more clear: create something outstanding every day. Being good enough becomes a simple question of sticking to the theme. If I fail, my system picks up the next day and I can try again. If I'm goal-oriented, it's extremely hard to place whether or not what I'm doing will prove good enough in the long run to achieve it. And if I ultimately fail, I may have spent decades pursuing something that will never happen. It'd be nice to avoid that.

"Create outstanding work, regardless of the medium." _Outstanding_ is a subjective word. It's meaning relies entirely on comparison. What does it "stand out" against, exactly? This is one of the few times comparing myself to others is more useful than destructive, but it requires a very specific frame of mind. It's less about comparing my current skill to the other person and more about opening my eyes to what a dedicated human being can do in the pursuit of excellence. I might think my work is amazing and it may be the best thing I've ever created, but knowing what's possible by observing others tempers my ego and places me more accurately on the universal scale of skill. In performing this exercise, I also need to accept the fact that despite my best efforts, there is an untouchable zone of skill I won't reach. I will never paint a portrait as sublime as those of John Singer Sargent, but knowing _someone_ is that good reminds me I have a long way to go. I trust in my system to get me as close as my years will allow, and every time I check my box for the day, my good enough gets a little better.






Eating pretzels while watching cartoons  I was a pretty good player, but I assumed I wouldn't be leading the league in goals. I subconsciously weighed the trade-off between how I spent my afternoons vs. the outcome my choice would produce. Was I willing to trade every afternoon for the possibility of scoring a few more goals and winning a game or two more? 

But first, a confession: I tell myself things are good enough even though they aren't. 

I'm trying to articulate why I spent most of my life slacking and only doing the bare minimum to get by. I want to describe the interesting differences between people's bare minumums. Why is one persons minimum someone else's max? 

Note: look to strike a juxtaposition between good enough, excellent (Van's Details video), and the perceived simplicity of "not doing" at all.

- Lifelong pursuit vs. ad-hoc fix
- Pushing the boundaries to raise the level
- When no one is watching vs. meeting external criteria
- Comparing the outcome to the original goal
- Comparing the outcome to the short term goal in service of the original goal
- Comparing the outcome to the ideal (measuring against what's already out in the world)
- The shallow envy of simplicity: Wondering what it's like to go through life with simple ambitions and a low self-improvement libido. 


- There's a pattern of behavior that causes me to try very hard, with focused intention and intense motivation, and just when I get pretty good at whatever I'm trying, I stop trying to improve. The resistance that comes along with the final 10-20% of improvement is so thick that it is far more comfortable to tread water than grab for the next gear and continue the pursuit of excellence.
- I'm a huge proponent of "good enough". My entire life is so saturated with _good enough_, I'm considering commissioning a half-finished statue with no upper body adorned with "This'll Do" on the placard. - There are varying standards for what constitutes a passable level of aptitude. For instance, I wouldn't want my heart surgeon to subscribe to my "good enough" lifestyle, but it's plenty for a golfing buddy.
- But there's something painful to admit about this stuff: I don't think I've ever hit even 80% (athletics don't count any more since I'm physiologically/physically limited. In my youth, athletics counted since I never once strength trained, so I have no idea what my limits were.)
- I'm very familiar with the feeling of quitting while I'm ahead. Too familiar. Run just fast enough to avoid being the slowest bear attack victim.
- Alain Prost vs. Ayrton Senna
- Get good enough so I rarely receive the fish eye in day to day life.
- But sometimes I run into someone who's humming along at a much higher level and now the questions start to pop up.
- This is one of the rare times when a little comparison to others can help me reacquire the GPS signal on the learning curve. "Oh shit, I'm further from 90% than I wanted to know..."
- But what about diminishing returns? What do those look like?
- I usually stop when I can do the job well enough for others not to question it.
- In personal work, I'm the only one who's available to question things, so this approach can hamper my ceiling.
- The balance between improvement and...what's the phrase for spending too much time on something because I'm unlikely to get any better at it no matter the time spent. Diminishing returns, but not that.
- When I first start, it's panic mode and rapid improvement is a need. As I get better, that panic and subsequent hunger abates. 
- Comfort and complacence are two sides of the same coin. On one side, that's what all this initial hard work is for. "I work really hard so I can be lazy" is the mentality. I think this has potential but the scale has to be correct. For example, I don't think I'd want to burn myself out for 30 years and then sit on my ass for 50. "How many margaritas on the beach can I have before I want to jump off a bridge from the meaninglessness?" But I might be able to scale that all the way down to the day. Bust my ass between the whistles and be free to stare at the wall until bedtime. Scale that up to the week, and I can bust my ass on weekdays and do leisurely stuff on weekends. Yes, I might want to bust my ass "doing leisure", but it's a different kind.
- The other side of the comfort coin, though, is coasting. We've already been over the damage coasting can do (this might be worded incorrectly, but relate it to the earlier essay), and when the hunger to improve wilts, the things I found great meaning in before are rendered unfulfilling. What's worse, subsequent lack of effort will cause the quality of output to fall below what I'm capable of. 
- Setting up a system to reset the finish line periodically.
- Share the link to AvE's learning curve aside? https://youtu.be/E7RgtMGL7CA?t=659
- At some point, improvement stops. This is something I can usually only identify retroactively by looking at the quality of what I'm doing today and comparing it to past quality. 
- Depending on my ambitions, stopping is not only ok, it's absolutely necessary. In fact, I don't even identify a spot on the learning curve for most things I do. I like to fix things with my car and around the house, but these are considered as-needed. I'm not actively pursuing home renovation or automotive repair as vocations, so when something goes wrong or breaks, that's the only time I care to learn about it. And I only care to learn about it enough to fix it and then I don't think about it ever again, I hope. 
- But I've noticed adopting this pattern sometimes with the things I am actively trying to improve, and that doesn't work. There isn't a magic formula for getting better at something, but there is one mortally important rule: do the thing. 
- I'm lucky because I was born with the ability to pick new skills up quickly, but there's a downside. I've had to work harder to teach myself how to work hard. This is definitely a "must be nice"
situation, but the reality closely resembles the tortoise and the hare. While I speed up the slope of the learning curve initially, I reach my mental limit for how hard I'm capable of working sooner than all the tortoises who didn't have it so easy at the start. It takes a little longer, but soon they'll display incredible skill while I'm still stuck on the fringes of beginner's luck.
- The guilt associated with stopping varies depending on the expectations I put on the skill itself and how it factors into my life. I'm a decent golfer. I played a bit when I was really young, but when I picked it back up in college I was dreadfully bad. I enjoyed playing but didn't want to be embarrassed every time I played with my buddies, so I started practicing obsessively. I skilled up until I could consistently hold my own against my friends. And stop losing golf balls in the woods. Them shits ain't free. It took a long time, but the dedicated consistent effort resulted in real improvement. This is where the positive aspects of comparison come into the fold. When I was in college, I only had two friends I played golf with. One had aspirations of being a teaching pro, so his level was all but untouchable. However, the other was decent, but not lights-out. So that was my bar. I had to practice enough to consistently beat that friend so I wouldn't _always_ finish last. My motivation to move up the learning curve was in direct comparison to my friends' skill levels.
- 

Notes for tonight/tomorrow: Is this piece about the learning curve, or is it about surrounding yourself with superstars so you always have something to chase? Hmmm... Or is it about something else?
Explore the above question, put some paragraphs together.


Cut from "Dangerous Territory" essay:

Gaining proficiency in any area involves three stages. Initially, we have zero clue so progress is slow and resembles fishing around in the kitchen junk drawer in total darkness. In some cases we can't remember what we're fishing for or why we even entered the kitchen in the first place. There's even a chance we prick our finger on a rogue pushpin and bail on the entire enterprise. Stage two starts when we figure those things out and start making progress hand over fist. We spend a lot of time here and it's difficult to determine how high up the mountain we are. Rabbit holes are often disguised as breakthroughs and sometimes when we turn over a stone to uncover an answer, we get 5 more stones along with it. Finally, after hundreds if not thousands of hours, the rate of improvement tapers off and we're free to spend the rest of eternity chasing mastery in stage three. Most people don't make it to stage three. Stage three is for Olympians only, which makes sense if you do the math. If achieving 90% competence takes 1,000 hours, getting that last 10% could take fifty times as long, if you ever capture it at all. So would I really want to spend 12 years getting ten percent when it took 12 weeks to get ninety?
