---
layout: post
category: writing
title: "Untitled"
date: '2023-02-27'
draft: true
---

When I was in college I got fired for calling out of work last minute to finish working on an assignment. I remember the exact spot I was standing on the exact floor of the exact building, my flustered pacing suddenly arrested when the words "taking you off the schedule" piped through my cell phone. Stunned, I returned to the lab to finish the only kind of work my poor time management would permit: the last-minute rush job. Back then my "wing it" approach to time management never panned out as I expected, and this is one example where it nailed me. I crammed what needed cramming and submitted the work, relieved to at least turn it in on time. The semester continued and I decided that rather than look for another job, I should focus completely on my school work so I could avoid spreading myself too thin(1).

Once I graduated (after changing majors it only took _two_ extra years 👍🏻), I needed to find steady work to hold me over while I looked for opportunities in my field and built up my portfolio. I kept in touch with some friends at my old job and in passing I learned the old manager was gone. "Would you like to come back?"  

(1) Every time I've encountered the phrase "spreading myself too thin", it's less an indication of the amount of work and more an indictment of the person doing it. People who "produce" are impervious to the mere concept because they're too busy shipping to even question their workload. Me? I've been asked if I'm spreading myself too thin by parents, school advisors, and employers alike. Yikes.

What do we do about the fact that our memory is completely unreliable? What can we set in place in the way we conduct ourselves that mitigates the negatives associated with holding onto a memory, while simultaneously exploiting its positives? I remember I made a choice to tell the truth when I was a kid. How true IS that? I've harnessed that memory to shape my life, but what if it's mostly fabricated? I've been shown more than once that a memory I KNEW was accurate ended up being completely wrong. I thought I was fired from a job once when I called out and they said "ok we'll clear you off the schedule and you let us know when you're able to work". For YEARS I accepted that as being fired, so I never called to get scheduled. I ended up getting "rehired" after that manager left 6 months later and in the months following I stumbled into a conversation that revealed that _I was the one who fired myself_ by not calling to get back on the schedule. Such an idiot. So what does that mean? Are all memories subject to this inaccuracy? When I started at my current company, I worked on a different product. While we tried to get that off the ground, another product began, piloted by another team. When my project failed to take hold in the market (I promise it wasn't my fault...I think...), the CEO met with me to let me know that while the rest of the team from my project was let go, I'd be staying on and moving over to work on the newer project. The implication, in my mind, was that I was more valuable to the company than just a member of a single project, and that my incredible skill and acumen would now be applied to other things. But that's just something my mind decided. While it may have been shaded that way by the CEO to keep my spirits up, the truth might be something more akin to "you're barely passable but hiring someone new is a pain in the ass, so keeping you on is the lesser of two evils." At the time, my ego didn't allow that VERY REAL possibility to even reveal itself. I'm still at the company a decade later, but maybe that just means I've continued to meet the "barely passable" criteria year after year. So is it useful at all to discover my memory of the subtext of that meeting might be false? Well, what if the only thing keeping me going long enough to _get_ any better at my craft was that memory of feeling valued? It's too late to know that at this point. The first example represents a time when I saw undisputable evidence that my memory had failed me, while the second was a thought exercise I put myself through based on the knowledge that false memories are common. How is this useful? There's a real danger of becoming paralyzed through analysis of every memory so is it worth putting anything through the microscope? What did I get out of that thought exercise? I got humbled, for one. My ego is inflated so the pain of getting knocked down a peg has become comforting over the years. I gained some gratitude as well. Changing my perspective on that moment in time shows me that luck probably had way more to do with it than I'd like to admit, and the only thing I can do with that knowledge is be grateful for the luck. What forced me to have that thought exercise in the first place? I don't remember, precisely. I think it may have had to do with me feeling entitled at work. Entitlement is one of those personal red flags that someone should rarely feel, so whenever I do I try to paint scenarios that render my entitlement as implausible as possible. If I'm feeling like a big shot at work and therefore annoyed by all the rules I have to follow, figuring out how to remember that having a steady job _at all_ means I essentially won the lottery is a decent starting point. 

So is it useful to look back? It depends. Playing memories out differently might open up new perspectives, giving you a boost when you feel down or an ego check when you feel entitled. In both cases, the accuracy of the original memory irrelevant. However, in the context of relying on memories as a tool to shape the present (and by extension, future), taking them at face value should only be done when the outcome is a net positive. How the hell could you possibly know that? What if you remember being great at something you actually suck at? It's a catch 22. If you pursue the thing based on the memory of being good, you might OMG THIS SUUUUUCKS

What's my point? Where's the surprise? Oh, memories aren't actual fact? Breaking new ground, I see. Is this just an excuse to tell 2 weak stories about my memory failing me? What do we do about the fact that our memory is unreliable? I dunno, man, nothing? Don't look back so much and it won't matter. The end. No one is forcing you to write about this. You chose the topic, remember? 

Note about the getting fired memory - I heard what I wanted to hear: I was tired of juggling school and work, so cutting one out was desirable. When taken off the schedule, I subconsciously assigned a new status quo of "not working" and assimilated to the false narrative that I got fired. Meanwhile, back in reality, had I shown up THAT DAY to work to get put back on the schedule for the rest of the week accompanied by the humblest of mea culpas for calling out, I'd be back in.

Notes for next time:
More exploration on the usefulness vs. uselessness of relying on memory as a tool to shape your present (and by extension, future) behavior. You have to look critically at what you do in the present as it relates to your future. This means knowing what you want for your future self. Easier said than done. But knowing that you have to know that isn't always self-evident, so once you know, you start to explore what those things might be and that can be very useful.