---
layout: post
category: writing
title: "A Stone's Throw Away"
date: '2023-03-10'
draft: true
---

When I was a little kid, my friends and I threw stones at cars to pass the time. I don't mean we sidled up to the edge of the economy parking at the airport and did our best John Elway at the parked cars. That would be bad enough, but no. We stood poised on a side street, conveniently obscured by the tree line, anxiously awaiting the next car to drive by so we could hurl whatever rocks we found along the road in its general direction.

Whenever I hear myself complain about how kids today never go outside because they're always staring at their devices, all slack-jawed and drooling, I recall these memories of a pre-internet childhood. The earliest one was on a beautiful summer day, the neighborhood kids and I thought it would be funny to toss handfuls of gravel into the road as cars passed. In my mind's eye, the side street acted as a darkened corridor, safe and private, where we could see who was brave enough to get the loudest gravel-hitting metal sound from their heave. The short-sightedness of youth is truly something to behold. "Step one: throw stuff at cars. Aaaaand repeat." Not one out of our gaggle of kids ever considered what the pilots of those cars would do after unsuspectingly driving into an airborne gravel gauntlet.

Everything was blissful. We were laughing, some cars were honking, it was all perfectly light-hearted. Until one kid found a big chunk of blacktop broken away from the edge of the road. It was heavy enough to require both hands to carry and without a second thought, a-one, and a-two, and a spinning discus throw towards the main road. The piece was so heavy it only traveled a few feet before flopping onto the road and sliding out of the shadows toward its eventual target. Tropes become tropes for a reason, and the freeze-frame with the narrated quip, "It was at this moment, he knew he fucked up." fits _this_ moment like the last jigsaw puzzle piece. Cue the slow motion, the terrified anticipation, and finally, the impact. 

Let's look at the possible scenarios for a moment. Scenario one: the slab slides through the busy road as if it has eyes and manages to get to the other side without anyone hitting it. Scenario two: the slab slides into the road and hits the side of someone's tire and bounces off to the side of the road. No harm done. Scenario three: the slab slides into the road and gets run over dead-on, causing a blow-out or an accident or god knows what else. It's worth noting at this point that in no scenario did we foresee the part _after_ slab hits: the sound of tires squealing as the car threshold-brakes to a stop, followed by an adult male emerging from the vehicle to pursue the responsible parties.

We were somewhat fortunate that our roll of the dice landed on a version of scenario two, wherein the slab hits the side of the tire. However, unlike our imagined scenario, the real version included the slab launching high into the tree canopy over our heads. As we watched the chunk of blacktop arcing majestically through the air, our wonderous gazes were arrested by the aforementioned tire screeching. We froze, not knowing what to do next. When the car door opened we had our answer: "RUN!! HIDE!!"

By this age, I'd been in trouble a thousand times already, but those were all _internal_. I broke this thing. I lied about that thing. I punched my sister in the leg when we were arguing. My mother informed me some time ago that when I was a toddler I threw an Etch-a-sketch at the cat...all things that fall neatly within the sphere of intra-family conflict. This was the first time I did something wrong that involved a stranger, and it was about to be the first time I got caught.

Running and hiding is the go-to move for kids when trouble strikes. One might even say it's the _only_ move, at least until we gain enough sense to face things head-on. In this instance, I was on an unfamiliar street in an unfamiliar neighborhood in unfamiliar circumstances. We didn't do any recon. We had no exit strategy. There were some scraggly bushes along the edge of the street and that was it. As we scattered, I half-heartedly tried to obscure myself, but not understanding how poorly hide & seek prepared me for my new life of running from the authorities, I was immediately spotted and coaxed back into the open to join the rest of the group.

At this point, the man asked for the representative of our gang to step forward. For those unfamiliar with the rules of neighborhood kid gangs, the kid whose house is the closest becomes the defacto leader in the event of capture. This is due to the fact that his mother will be the first one to catch wind of the incident as we get dragged by our collars to her front door. I remember thinking I was going to be sent to jail, grounded for life, or hung by my toenails and forced to peel potatoes. That last one was a real thing that our gym teacher used to say to threaten us into behaving. I believed him.

Mercifully, I don't remember too much about the conversation with my mother when I got home. It promptly filed itself away with all the other similar lectures I would receive in years to come so as not to take up too much space in my memory. One thing I do remember, though, is that I don't remember the names or faces of any of the kids that day. I said they were my friends, which I believe is true, but I have a healthy hunch that the day we almost killed someone by shot-putting rocks into traffic was the last time I ever saw them. Maybe I'll ask mom. I bet she doesn't even remember.